---
date: 2025-07-03
title: Disco Elysium
book_authors:
  - Robert Kurvitz
  - Helen Hindpere
  - Argo Tuulik
  - Cash DeCuir
  - Olga Moskvina
  - Siim Sinam√§e
series: Elysium
book_number: 2
rating: 5
image: /books/covers/disco_elysium.jpg
---

<cite class="video-game-title">{{ page.title }}</cite>, written by <span
class="author-name">{{ page.book_authors[0] }}</span> <abbr class="etal">et
al.</abbr>, is a role-playing game produced by ZA/UM. It's the story of
Harrier "Harry" Du Bois, a man who wakes up with no memories, and has to solve
a murder while learning who he is.

{% capture this_book %}<cite class="book-title">{{ page.title }}</cite>{% endcapture %}
{% capture this_series %}{% series_text page.series %}{% endcapture %}

I went into {{ this_book }} knowing only that it was highly acclaimed and that
you played a detective solving a murder. That didn't begin to do it justice.
{{ this_book }} is one of the best video games ever made. The writing is
incredible. The voice acting brings every character---and all 24 voices in
Harry's head---to life. The world is exciting, strange, and alive. It's my
favorite video game, and it's a literary masterpiece.

### There Is Nothing; Only Warm, Primordial Blackness

The player controls Harrier "Harry" Du Bois, a man who wakes up almost naked
in a trashed hotel room with no memory and has to piece his life back
together. Over time, he learns he's a cop. A damn good one. He's in
Martinaise. He's there to solve a murder. He was in love once. He blasted his
mind into pieces with alcohol and drugs. Harry is the perfect window into
Elysium because he knows nothing about himself or the world. This lets the
player slowly piece together the setting right alongside Harry as he
rediscovers it.

The world of {{ this_book }} is almost an alternate history. You can map the
game world of Elysium to real-world inspirations: Revachol and Martinaise are
France; Graad is Russia; Oranje is the Netherlands; Seol is Japan and Korea;
Mesque is Spain and Mexico. Even in-game events and people have clear
analogues: the Antecentennial Revolution and Kras Mazov are the October
Revolution and Karl Marx; Samara is Southeast Asia, and the war-crime-ridden
conflicts there echo the Korean and Vietnam wars; the EPIS is the European
Union.

That familiarity is used to lull you into a false sense of security. So when
the magical realism shows up it's disorienting. It makes you feel the same
uncertainty and confusion that Harry must feel as your assumptions about the
world collapse.

<!-- Combine above and below? Something like "That familiarity gives you a
false sense of security that makes it easy to miss..." Then the examples, then
the pale, then "It makes you feel..." -->

This sense of false security makes it easy to ignore the signs of the
supernatural. Harry's 24 skills that have conversations in his head is just a
symptom of his psychosis. The cryptid hunters are just local weirdos. Then you
learn about the Pale. That Elysium is set of shattered landmasses surrounded
by a physics-defying, reality-dissolving mist.

### After The World, The Pale; After The Pale -- The World Again

<!-- Is it really cyclical? It's sort of... The past has a grasp of the
future. Harry's past action... But maybe the Pale is what connects the
cyclical nature to the past? It's rarified past... -->

A major theme of {{ this_book }} is the cyclical nature of life; of failure
and redemption; of how history repeats over and over. Harry is the most
obvious example of this theme: he had a good job, a girlfriend, purpose, a
child on the way. He destroyed it all with drugs and alcohol, blasting his
mind into fragmented personalities and erasing his memories. But that isn't
the end for Harry---that's where his story starts.

<!-- I kind of want to expand on the history part in the Revachol section -->

Revachol itself also goes through cycles. Once the seat of a powerful, fascist
empire, it fell into moral decay before being torn apart by a communist
uprising. From the ashes rose the Commune, which was then crushed by the
Coalition of Nations. This cyclical pattern is built into the very fabric of
reality. The Pale is slowly growing, enveloping and dissolving Elysium. But
once it's done, the world will be born anew. "After the world, the Pale;
after the Pale -- the world again."

The Pale is more than just a force of destruction. It is the "rarefied
past"---the accumulated weight of all the history, memory, and failure of the
world, grown so dense it dissolves the present. That weight mirrors Harry's
internal collapse: his past mistakes threaten to erase who he is.

Through all this chaos, through the cycles of collapse and recovery, there is
one constant: Kim Kitsuragi, your partner.

### This Man Would Hurl Himself in Death's Way to Save You

Kim Kitsuragi. I do not know how to describe him in a way that will fully
convey what he is. He's your partner, the anchor that lets you drift, but
doesn't let you get lost. And you need that, because the game throws you
straight into chaos---you don't know who you are or where you are---but the
fact that you can trust Kim gives you something solid to hold onto.

He is one of the best developed characters in any media. He is kind,
dependable, utterly loyal. Harry's _Esprit de Corps_ skill puts it best when
they first meet: "If an assault were launched on this building right now -- if
the windows came crashing down and the whole world descended upon you -- this
man would hurl himself in death's way to save you. You are sure of this -- but
why?" He is more than that. He isn't a sycophant. He has his own deep history
and goals. Uncovering them, and building the rapport between you two, is what
makes the game so powerful.

There's one scene that had me enthralled. We'd just discovered a car sunk
along the coast and covered by the tide. Kim knows immediately that it's
yours, wrecked during your earlier bender. But he says nothing. He just sits
on a swing set with you for hours, talking, whistling, waiting, until you're
ready to face what you've done. That's who Kim is.

### Something Beautiful is Going to Happen

But despite the bleakness, there is so much beauty in {{ this_book }}. There
is humor and absurdity and friendship and sorrow. There is a man trying to
rebuild a life he forgot, and his stalwart guide and friend helping him along.
The world is doomed. The Pale will destroy it. But despite that, despite
knowing there is no future, there is hope. In a way, that's the story of life.
You are born knowing you'll die, and yet it is wonderful.

The writing is haunting. Its phrases still echo in my mind.[^bow]

[^bow]:
    > Sparks fall like snow from the bow collector of streetcar no 42. Slowly down
    > the slope from Voyager Road and then east on the B206, across the river, to
    > where there are no closed factories or ruins. To study. At the academy.
    > Electrical cables run overhead and the bow collector draws across them like
    > a musical instrument. A flash. She's standing at the rear window, holding
    > onto the rail. In a spring coat, waving at you...
    >
    > It's early in the morning. The world is dark blue. The sparks light her
    > face. A delicate composition of triangles. The street seems to grow longer,
    > like in a dolly zoom. And there's something in the air as you stand there
    > and wave back at the shape growing smaller and smaller. Something that has
    > *always* been there. A great see-through world. The tenderness you feel. The
    > ghost of Revachol between you, carrying your signals. The holy messenger.

