---
date: 2024-06-05
title: Eater
book_author: Gregory Benford
series: null
book_number: 1
rating: 4
image: /books/covers/eater.jpg
---

<cite class="book-title">{{ page.title }}</cite> is a hard sci-fi novel by
<span class="author-name">{{ page.book_author }}</span>. It follows a group of
astrophysicists who discover a black hole that is headed straight towards
Earth.

{% capture this_book %}<cite class="book-title">{{ page.title }}</cite>{% endcapture %}
{% capture the_author %}<span class="author-name">{{ page.book_author }}</span>{% endcapture %}

I did not expect to enjoy {{ this_book }} as much as I did! The book has a
poor rating on Goodreads[^goodread] and almost no presence in online
communities like Reddit. In fact, I only started reading it up because I hit
the "random book" button on my ebook reader and it came up. I'm glad I did!

[^goodread]: A score of 3.50 with only 735 ratings.

{{ this_book }} is maybe the hardest sci-fi book I've ever read: the
scientists talk just like real scientists; the author describes plots I made
when I was a cosmologist; the science itself is so tight that based on my
background as a cosmologist I was able to predict what the scientists would
conclude in a few pages; there is a [MACHO][macho] joke that is not
explained;[^macho] the book has two **actual plots**, one of plasma densities
and one of the structure of a rotating black hole. I think that, in some ways,
accounts for the poor reception this book gets, it feels like being thrown
into a graduate physics class, which---as a physicists---is partly what made
me enjoy it so much.

[macho]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_compact_halo_object

[^macho]: The Eater itself is of course a [MACHO][macho].

The book feels so realistic I was worried that the introduction of the
Eater---a sentient black hole---would completely break the immersion, but {{
the_author }} had an excellent explanation for how it could exist: it's not
that the black hole is alive, it's the magnetic fields around it.

Almost all of the "action" in {{ this_book }} takes places in the research
center, as the scientists learn more about the Eater, talk with it, and come
up with responses. I think this works well to make the book feel realistic.

The characters are probably the weakest part, but adequate. The three main
characters are:

- Channing Knowlton is a terminally-ill astronaut and the most well developed
  character. I figured out why {{ the_author }} needed her to be dying about
  half way through the book: so that she could be sent into space to deliver
  Earth's final strike when a heroic sacrifice was needed. I think her
  character suffers a bit for having been written by a man, because there are
  some sections where she thinks about clothing, or how she wants to be
  desired, that read a little shallow.

- Benjamin Knowlton, the husband of Channing, and the head of the astronomy
  group that discovers Eater. His rivalry with Channing's ex-lover Kingsley
  feels a little forced, and his development as his wife deteriorates and
  dies doesn't feel really real. She's dying, why do you want her to rest at
  home so much?

- Kingsley Dart, the most stereotypical British man alive. A bit of a [Gary
  Stu][gary], he is the smartest astronomer, incredibly politically savvy,
  gets the girls, and even throws a secret agent off the roof. His
  relationship with Channing feels authentic, possibly because the author
  found it easier to write for a self-insert.

[gary]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Sue
