---
date: 2024-04-19
title: Echopraxia
book_authors: Peter Watts
series: Firefall
book_number: 2
rating: 5
image: /books/covers/echopraxia.jpg
---

<cite class="book-title">{{ page.title }}</cite> is the second book in <span
class="author-name">{{ page.book_authors }}</span>'s <span
class="book-series">{{ page.series }}</span> series, unfolding at roughly the
same time as {% book_link "Blindsight" %}. It follows
parasitologist Daniel Brüks, who gets unwillingly dragged into a conflict
between multiple transhuman factions, travels to the _Icarus_ station orbiting
the sun, and eventually back to Earth.

{% capture this_book %}<cite class="book-title">{{ page.title }}</cite>{% endcapture %}
{% capture blindsight %}{% book_link "Blindsight" %}{% endcapture %}

The world Watts built in {{ blindsight }} was enthralling, packed with
scientific and philosophical arguments about consciousness. I **loved** it. {{
this_book }} expands on that exceptional worldbuilding while shifting its
focus to themes of god, godhood, free will, and humanity's place in a
transhuman world. It's a fantastic sequel---possibly even better than the
first.

The major characters are:

- Daniel Brüks, a parasitologist and baseline human who has chosen not to get
  any enhancements.

- Jim Keaton, a human soldier and the father of Siri Keaton from {{ blindsight }}.

- Rakshi Sengupta, an augmented human serving as a backup pilot for the ship.

- The Bicamerals, a hivemind of people who have modified their brains to
  discover scientific advancements through seemingly religious means. Their
  interpreter is a slightly modified human, Lianna Lutterodt.

- Valerie, a vampire who escaped from an academic lab, on a mission to free
  her people. She travels with her four zombie soldiers.

- Portia, an alien computer-slime mold sent by _Rorschach_ to _Icarus_.

The novel is full of with Christian imagery, reinforcing its themes of
transcendence and digital theology:

- Valerie is a Moses figure, trying to free her people from slavery. Her first
  appearance is in the desert, under a pillar of flame (the Bicamerals'
  tornado seen through night-vision goggles).

- Vampires have a "crucifix glitch" that is used to control them.

- The Bicamerals' ship is named the _Crown of Thorns_. The _Rorschach_ from {{
  blindsight }} is shaped like a crown of thorns.

- Siri suffers a stigmata-like wound in his palm, inflicted by the vampire
  Jukka Sarasti.

- "Heaven" exists as a virtual reality world that people can retreat to.

- The idea of resurrection---or at least some form of life continuing after
  death---appears repeatedly, from the snake Brüks samples in the desert to the
  zombies, and even Brüks himself after he is infected by Portia.

Parasites and biology are also central themes. Brüks studies parasites, yet in
many ways, he is one himself---the weakest member of the group, surviving by
staying out of the way. Humans, too, are like parasites, struggling to exist
in a world dominated by transhumans. Portia, the alien intelligence sent by
_Rorschach_, traps and studies the crew just as Brüks studies animals back in
Oregon. Portia is a parasite in its own right, surviving only within hosts
like _Icarus_ or the _Crown of Thorns_.

Loss is another major theme. Brüks lost his wife to the virtual world of
"heaven." Keaton lost his wife the same way---and his son Siri to the mission
in {{ blindsight }}. Sengupta lost her wife to a virus that Brüks's
simulations failed to catch before it killed thousands. Each character is
shaped by their losses and, in the end, undone by what they do in response to
them.

{{ this_book }} received mixed reviews compared to {{ blindsight }}, which was
almost universally praised. Many found it even more confusing, largely because
the narrator, Brüks, is the character who understands the least about what's
going on. But while his perspective is limited, I didn't find the plot
difficult to follow---everything is revealed and explained if you pay
attention. So far, {{ this_book }} is my favorite read of the year.
