---
date: 2024-02-18
title: Redwall
author: Brian Jacques
series: Redwall
book_number: 1
rating: 4
image: /books/covers/redwall.jpg
---

<span class="book-title">Redwall</span> is the first book in Brian Jacques's
Redwall series. It tells the story of Mathias, a mouse who follows his destiny
to become the warrior of Redwall Abbey and defeat the evil rat Cluny the
Scourge.

I loved the Redwall series as a child, and I'm now enjoying reading them to my
own children, ages 6 and 7. Although aimed at children, not adults or even
young-adults, I didn't find <span class="book-title">Redwall</span> annoying
to read. The themes are simple, the plot is uncomplicated, and it follows a
typical hero's quest narrative.

The morality in the book is black and white---the good guys are purely good
and the villains are truly evil and eventually suffer for it. However, <span
class="book-title">Redwall</span> does not shy away from some more mature
themes. Death is a constant part of the narrative. The bad guys come to
gruesome ends and even the hero's friends aren't safe. I think we parents can
find this uneasy, wanting to shelter our children a bit, but my kids handled
it well. I know as a child I would have love the inclusion of topics adults
were hesitant to discuss.

I highly recommend <span class="book-title">Redwall</span> for new readers and
parents looking to get their kids hooked on books. My kids loved it so much
they begged me to read constantly, and I didn't mind doing so. When we
finished, we immediately picked up the sequel {% include book_link.html
title="Mossflower" %} and dove right in.
