---
date: 2023-12-25
title: The Shadow of the Torturer
author: Gene Wolfe
series: The Book of the New Sun
book_number: 1
rating: 4
image: /books/covers/the_shadow_of_the_torturer.jpg
---

<cite class="book-title">The Shadow of the Torturer</cite> is the first
installment in Gene Wolfe's The Book of the New Sun tetralogy. It follows the
life of Severian, a torturer and executioner on a dying Earth. The pacing is
slow, but Wolfe's worldbuilding is fantastic, crafting a setting that pulls
the reader in.

The book is narrated by Severian, a torturer exiled from his guild for showing
mercy by helping a victim commit suicide. It chronicles his life as he rises
to become the Autarch of his civilization. Like {% include book_link.html
title="Hyperion" %}---and the opposite of {% include book_link.html
title="Consider Phlebas"%}---<cite class="book-title">The Shadow of the
Torturer</cite> tells a seemingly small, personal story that nonetheless
effects and hints at larger forces and events happening just out of sight. The
reader only gets glimpses of these looming mysteries, and I suspect part of
the payoff of the series will be uncovering what they are.

There are a several motifs, the most obvious of which is the fragile boundary
between life and death. Severian cheats death multiple times---once at the
beginning of the book when he almost drowns (water is another motif) and again
later when he loses the flower duel. He is a torturer and an executioner. He
lives amongst the graves and mausoleums surrounding his guild.

Wolfe uses archaic English, mixed with some Latin, to give the world an old
and alien feeling. I frequently looked up unfamiliar words, although you can
also treat them as a kind of "technobabble" and infer their meanings from
context. In this way, the experience is similar to reading {% include
book_link.html title="The Quantum Thief" %}, which uses foreign words for a
similar effect. I think Wolfe's prose is more successful, because the prosody
of archaic English matches the rest of the text better. Still it makes for a
dense, slow read.

<cite class="book-title">The Shadow of the Torturer</cite> is similar to
Rajaniemi's {% include book_link.html title="The Quantum Thief" %} in another
way: they both have very deep worldbuilding at their heart. Again I think
Wolfe's is more successful than Rajaniemi's because {% include book_link.html
title="The Quantum Thief" %} feels like it dumps the worldbuilding over you in
a torrent, while <cite class="book-title">The Shadow of the Torturer</cite>
leaves it hidden in the nooks and crannies of the story for you to slowly
uncover, making it feel more organic.
