---
date: 2023-10-29
title: There Is No Antimemetics Division
author: qntm
series: null
book_number: 2
rating: 3
image: /books/covers/there_is_no_antimemetics_division.jpg
---

<span class="book-title">There Is No Antimemetics Division</span> is a book
based in the [SCP][scp] universe. It explores the idea of anti-memes---ideas
that either can't be thought, quickly drop out of your memory when you stop
focusing on them, or are dangerous to think---and how you can hope to contain
a force you literally can't remember.

[scp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SCP_Foundation

The book was written serially as a collection of short stories. The stories in
the first half of the book are loosely related and mainly serve to give the
reader some background on the characters, the foundation, and anti-memes. The
stories in the second half read more like chapters, with the story line
flowing continuously through them.

The short-story origins of the book means there are no wasted words, the plot
moves quickly. Characters are introduced, challenges show up within a page,
and ten pages later there is a twist and a resolution. But this is also the
book's weakness. There is not much character development outside of the ones
who are indispensable to the plot. There isn't much downtime, the tension just
keeps ramping up. Likewise the world feels a little like a stage: just wide
enough to contain the action.

The sparsity and jumps backwards and forward through time sort of works with
the theme of forgetting and only being able to see your adversary in the
pattern of missing ideas and memories, but the execution feels a little
clumsy. To tell a story in the negative space of the narrative takes careful
planning that feels absent.

Overall a fun read.
