---
layout: post
title: "Lab41 Reading Group: Swapout: Learning an Ensemble of Deep Architectures"
gab41: https://gab41.lab41.org/lab41-reading-group-swapout-learning-an-ensemble-of-deep-architectures-e67d2b822f8a
description: >
  Want to train a network but unsure about dropout vs. stochastic depth?
  Should you use a ResNet? Stop worry and use Swapout; it does all that and
  more!
image: /files/swapout/header.jpg
image_alt: >
  A picture of a building with black and white windows which reminds me of the
  diagrams used below to describe swapout
categories:
  - reading-group
  - lab41
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files/swapout/{% endcapture %}

Next up for the reading group is [a paper about a new stochastic training
method][paper] written by Saurabh Singh, Derek Hoiem, and David Forsyth of the
University of Illinois at Urbana--Champaign.[^singh] Their new training method
is like [dropout][do][^hinton], [stochastic depth][sd][^huang], and
[ResNets][rn][^he] but with its own special twist. I recommend picking up the
paper after going through this post, it is very readable and includes an
excellent section on performing inference with a stochastically trained
network that I will only touch on.

[^singh]:
    {% citation
      author_last="Singh, Saurabh and Hoiem, Derek and Forsyth, David"
      work_title="Swapout: learning an ensemble of deep architectures"
      container_title="Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS'16)"
      date="2016"
      publisher="Curran Associates Inc."
      first_page="28"
      last_page="36"
      url="https://papers.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/hash/c51ce410c124a10e0db5e4b97fc2af39-Abstract.html"
    %}

[^hinton]:
    {% citation
      author_last="Geoffrey E. Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov"
      work_title="Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors"
      container_title="arXiv"
      volume="abs/1207.0580"
      date="2012"
      url="https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14832074"
    %}

[^huang]:
    {% citation
      author_last="Huang, Gao and Sun, Yu and Liu, Zhuang and Sedra, Daniel and Weinberger, Kilian Q."
      work_title="Deep Networks with Stochastic Depth"
      container_title="Computer Vision -- ECCV 2016"
      editor="Leibe, Bastian and Matas, Jiri and Sebe, Nicu and Welling, Max"
      date="2016"
      publisher="Springer International Publishing"
      first_page="646"
      last_page="661"
      doi="10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_39"
    %}

[^he]:
    {% citation
      author_last="He, Kaiming and Zhang, Xiangyu and Ren, Shaoqing and Sun, Jian"
      work_title="Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition"
      container_title="2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)"
      date="2016"
      first_page="770"
      last_page="778"
      doi="10.1109/CVPR.2016.90"
    %}

[paper]: https://papers.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/hash/c51ce410c124a10e0db5e4b97fc2af39-Abstract.html
[do]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580
[sd]: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_39
[rn]: https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90

As you may recall, dropout works by randomly setting individual neuron outputs
in a network to zero, essentially dropping those neurons from training and
hence forcing the network to use a variety of signals instead of over-training
on one. Stochastic depth ([covered in a previous post][sd_post]) is similar,
but instead of dropping neurons it bypasses whole layers! We can think of
these operations a little more mathematically, but first I'll have to define
some notation.

[sd_post]: {% post_url 2016-07-11-lab41_stochastic_depth %}

I'll use block to mean a set of layers in some specific configuration (for
example, a convolution followed by a ReLU), and a unit to be one of the
computational nodes within the block (basically a neuron). `X` will be the
input from the previous block, and `F(X)` will be the output from a unit
within the current block.

Using this notation then, we can think about ResNets as consisting of blocks
where ever unit in the block always reports `X + F(X)`. A standard,
feed-forward layer can be viewed in this framework as well, with each unit
always reporting `F(X)`. The paper includes a figure, which I've edited and
included below, showing feed-forward and ResNets in this scheme:

![A diagram representation of blocks and units for a feed-forward and ResNet
architecture][feed_res_image]

[feed_res_image]: {{ file_dir }}/feed_and_res.svg

Things become more interesting when we start thinking about stochastic
training methods in this manner. Dropout can be thought of as randomly
selecting the output for each unit from the following set of possible
outcomes: `{0, F(X)}`. Likewise, stochastic depth can be thought of as
randomly selecting between the outcomes `{X, F(X)}` for each block, so that
every unit in the block returns `X` or `F(X)` together. Both of these training
methods are shown in the figure below, which is again has been modified from
the paper:

![A diagram representation of blocks and units for dropout and stochastic
depth architecture][drop_stoch_image]

[drop_stoch_image]: {{ file_dir }}/drop_and_depth.svg

So now that I've laid the groundwork, what does swapout add? Well, add isn't
really the right word, swapout combines! It randomly selects from the four
possible outcomes mentioned above: feed-forward, ResNet, dropout, and
stochastic depth. They do this by allowing each unit to randomly select from
the following outcomes: `{0, X, F(X), X + F(X)}`. Therefore, swapout samples
from every possible stochastic depth and ResNet architecture, both including
and not include dropout!

In addition to swapout, the authors define a simpler version called
skipforward. Skipforward only allows units to select from the outcomes `{X,
F(X)}`, that is limiting the choice to only stochastic depth and feed-forward.
Both of these architectures are shown in the figure below, which is again from
the paper with modification:

![A diagram representation of blocks and units for skipforward and swapout
depth architecture][skip_swap_image]

[skip_swap_image]: {{ file_dir }}/swapout.svg

One of the dilemmas when using stochastic training methods is: how do I use
the network at inference time? When training the network is constantly
mutating as units pick different ways of behaving, but at inference time that
network needs to be roughly static so that the same input will always yield
the same prediction. We can make the network static in two ways:


1. **Deterministic inference**: All values are replaced by their expectation
   value. That is, the unit that was dropped half the time is set to 50%
   weight.

2. **Stochastic inference**: Several versions of the network are randomly
   generated at the end of training and their results averaged. A unit that is
   dropped half the time would (by chance) appear in half randomly generated
   versions of the network.

Although it seems like deterministic inference should be faster (because it
does not require running multiple networks) it has several drawbacks. The
first drawback is that you can not actually calculate the true expectation
value for a swapout network, only approximate it. The second is the the fact
that [batch normalization][bn]---one of the most powerful training
methodologies---does not work with deterministic inference. The authors
conclude (through testing) that stochastic inference works best.

[bn]: http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v37/ioffe15.pdf

The authors test swapout and skipforward networks against networks trained
with stochastic depth, dropout, and various ResNet architectures. They
conclude:

- Swapout improves results as compared with ResNet

- Stochastic inference beats deterministic, even with only a few averaged results

- Increasing the width of a network greatly improves performance

One final note on the paper: the way they define the various operations as
random selections from a set of possible outcomes is, for me, a very intuitive
way to think about them. I would love to see other papers use a similar
framework for describing their network modifications!
