---
layout: post
title: "A Review of Nookdesk's Standing Desk"
description: >
  I bought a Nookdesk standing desk now that I'm working from home; I like it!
  Read on for a detailed review.
image: /files/nookdesk/nookdesk.jpg
image_alt: >
  The Nookdesk in my office, raised to standing height.
categories: 
  - opinions
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files/nookdesk/{% endcapture %}

I bought a standing desk recently because I am working from home three days a
week. I considered many desks but I decided on a [Nookdesk][nookdesk]. It was
not an easy to choose because I only found [one **real** review
online][review]; all the others were rewritten press releases.

Luckily I have a good friend who had just bought one. She was happy with her
Nookdesk and so I bought mine on the strength of her recommendation. As it turns
out, that was a good decision. For a complete review, read on.

[nookdesk]: https://www.nookdesk.com/
[review]: https://macsources.com/nookdesk-review-ordering-and-building-of-the-smart-desk-that-enhances-your-life/

## Desktop and Frame

The [Nookdesk][nookdesk] has a lot of customization options. The desktops are
offered in multiple materials from various laminates to solid bamboo. The
desktop is always 30″ deep with widths from 48″ to 72″. It is 3/4″ thick. The
desk frame comes in three colors: white, black, and grey.

I chose a 30″ by 72″ (+$200) blackwood laminate (+$100) desktop with white
frame.  The wood laminate feels great: smooth with just a bit of depth from
the grain. The white frame contrasts nicely with the black desktop.

![The wood laminate surface.][surface]

[surface]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_wood_laminate_surface.jpg

The desk height ranges from 23.5″ to 49″ as measured from the ground to the
top of the desktop. This is just enough range for me as use it at 26.5″ when
seated and 47.5″ when standing.

## Storage

The Nookdesk has some unique storage options. One of them is the "upper
storage" add-on which I would describe more as a shelf. It is mounted on the
top of the desk at the back edge. It is 12″ deep and rises 4″ above the
desktop. I store my game controller and headphones under the shelf, and I put
my monitors on top to bring them up to eye-level. The upper storage add-on
cost $100, but was well worth the expense.

![The upper storage add-on to the nookdesk.][upper]

[upper]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_upper_storage.jpg

There is a similar "lower storage" shelf that mounts under the desk at the
front edge. I did not order one because I like to have my desk surface very
close to my knees in the sitting position, and the lower storage would add 4″
to the bottom of the desk. Like the "upper storage", it also costs $100.

The ability to add some storage to my desk and raise my monitors was the
feature that originally drew me to the Nookdesk and was what finally sold me
on it.

## Accessories

Nookdesk offers a wide variety of accessories, from keyboard trays to
speakers. Below I review only the ones I purchased.

### Controller

![The desk motor controller.][controller]

[controller]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_controller.jpg

The Nookdesk comes with one of two controllers: a simple one which has only up
and down buttons, and a programmable one with three memory settings for an
additional $34. I got the programmable controller because getting my desk to
exactly the right height each time was important to me. I only really needed
two memory positions: one for standing and one for sitting. I still have not
assigned the third position.

### Powerstrip

![The freeport powerstrip mounted under the desk.][power]

[power]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_freeport_powerstrip.jpg

Nookdesk sells a Freeport power strip that attaches to the underside of the
desk for $80. It has eight outlets (including two with space around them for
those extra-large plugs) and four USB-A outlets, three of which provide up
2.4A and one which supports [Quick Charge 3.0][qc]. It has a 10 foot cord.

You can plug the desk's motor into one of the eight outlets so that you only
have to plug in the Freeport to the wall. I am satisfied with the power strip,
but I suspect I could have found a cheaper one from a third party.

[qc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quick_Charge

### CPU Mount

Nookdesk also sells an under-desk CPU mount. It fits towers up to 9.25″ wide
and 30″ tall, although if the desk is in its lowest position there is only 20″
of clearance for the tower.

![The under-desk CPU mount.][cpu]

[cpu]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_cpu_mount.jpg

I love the CPU mount; it is one of my favorite features of the desk. It was
well worth the $100 it cost as it keeps my computer off the ground and frees
up space on my desktop. I recommend it highly!

### Cable Tray

![The under-desk cable tray.][tray]

[tray]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_cable_tray.jpg

The cable management tray is a metal tray that runs along the bottom of the
desk at the rear edge and allows you to tuck your cables into it to keep them
tidy. It costs $100. It does a good job of keeping cables from hanging down
and getting in your way when you're sitting, but seems expensive. However, I
don't know how I would organize my cables without it.

## Ordering and Shipping

You can order the desk without creating an account on Nookdesk's website, but
if you do not create an account then retrieving your order status is
difficult. You are supposed use a special page on the site where you enter
your email address, but it did not work for me. Instead I had to get customer
support to send me the tracking number.

Delivery was free (due to a [coupon code, `NOOK150`][code]) but seems to run
about $120 normally. The desk was sent by FedEx in two shipments totaling six
boxes. The two shipments arrived on the same day a week after I ordered.

[code]: https://www.evodesk.com/deals

The box containing the desktop was very large and relatively heavy. I was able
to lug it up my stairs by myself but it would have been much easier to have a
second person. The box containing the desk frame was also really heavy
(perhaps more so) because of the two motors that move the desk up and down,
but it was thankfully pretty compact and so easy to maneuver.

## Assembly

Assembling the desk was actually harder than I expected because there were a
few problems:

- The hardware---screws, bolts, guides, and whatnot---was packed in unlabeled
bags and the instructions reused the same icons to indicate different screws.
- The bill of materials listed both items that came in the bags and those that
came preinstalled in the same count. When it said "10 screws of type X" it
might mean there were 4 in the bag and 6 already attached to the frame.
- Hardware was included that is only used for optional accessories. I had
screws leftover that I had not used at all. This made me worry that I had
completely forgotten some critical step.
- Two hex keys are included, but one of them had such poor tolerance that it
would not drive the bolts. I ended up using a set of hex keys that I already
owned.
- The shelf is connected to the frame with four screws, but the contact area
is so small it kept coming apart. I needed to add washers that I had lying
around to make a solid connection. See my photo below:

![Attaching the upper storage with washers.][washers]

[washers]: {{ file_dir }}/nookdesk_shelf_washer.jpg

Assembly took between 3 to 4 hours, but was not particularly difficult after I
worked through the above issues. I made a minor mistake where I did not
install the frame rails at the right time and had to backtrack and remove some
pieces to get them in. [Jon Walters][review] says he made the same mistake in
his review.

You need enough space to flip the desk over during assembly because the build
is started with the desk upside down. The desk is unwieldy, so it helps to
have a second person for this step, but I was able to do the entire build
solo.

## Final Thoughts

With taxes and shipping my desk was $1057, after a coupon code gave me $150
off and free shipping. Expensive, but I spend 10 hours a day at it so the
price seems fair.

Although the assembly and shipping experience could be improved, the desk is
solid and includes great accessories. I have really appreciated being able to
switch positions instead of sitting for 8 hours, and so I am very happy with
my Nookdesk.
