---
layout: post
title: "Data Science, Compensation, and Asking for Money"
description: > 
  Advice about data science salaries and examples from my career of
  negotiating your offer.
image: /files/data-science-salaries/Wagner-höhenberg_paying_his_dues.jpg
image_alt: > 
  Painting by Josef Wagner-Höhenberg showing a late 1800s farmer signing a
  contract at a wooden table while a notary gestures to the two bankers at the
  other end of the table who have a pile of gold and silver coins in front of
  them.
categories: 
  - career-advice
  - data-science 
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files/data-science-salaries/{% endcapture %}

---

_This post was meant to be a chapter in a book where data scientists who had
transitioned from academia to industry shared their experience and advice.
Unfortunately, the 2020 pandemic seems to have killed the project, so I am
sharing my chapter here. Enjoy!_

---

I didn't become a physicist for money---quite the opposite, in fact. I remember
walking across UC Berkeley's Sproul Plaza with my father on our way to our
favorite lunch spot when I told him, "I love that [Cosmology][Cosmology] has
so few practical applications! It's amazing that someone will pay me just to
expand human knowledge!" Perhaps that should have been my first hint that
Physics did not have great long-term prospects, but I don't think that would
have changed my decision to pursue it.

[cosmology]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmology

The first time I visited [CERN][cern] during [my PhD][phd], I got an ascetic
feeling from looking at the dilapidated buildings and missing storm shutters.
Its exterior reflected the same feeling I had expressed to my father a few
years earlier---that science was worth more than dollars. I felt instantly at
home.

[cern]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERN
[phd]: {% post_url 2018-05-20-my_phd_thesis %}

When I ended up [leaving academia][leaving] several years later, it was for
stability, not money. I had no intention of dragging my family around the
globe just to end up six years older and once again hunting for a job. I'd
seen my CERN colleagues try---and universally fail---to land tenure-track
positions. So I decided to head back to where I grew up---the Bay Area---and see
if I could make it as a data scientist with the help of the [Insight Data
Science program][insight].

[leaving]: {% post_url 2018-01-19-should_i_get_a_phd %}
[insight]: {% post_url 2018-08-21-should_i_go_to_insight %}

## Compensation

As someone who'd never been motivated by money, I discovered during my job
search that I was a little naive as to what all the numbers meant.
Fortunately, Insight anticipated this and brought experienced data scientists,
startup founders, and tech company executives to give us a crash course on
life outside of academia. I learned everything there was to know about salary,
bonuses, and equity.

I was already familiar with **base salary**: what you're paid in semi-weekly
paychecks in exchange for doing your job. It's what I thought of when I heard
"This job pays $120,000 a year." But salary isn't everything---data scientists
often get paid in several different ways.

Every offer I received paid a **yearly bonus** of 15--20% based on performance.
These were from standard tech companies, but I also heard from data scientists
in finance and investment who'd be disappointed if their bonus wasn't an
"integer multiple of their salary."[^quant_note]

[^quant_note]: Although as a [quant][quant] friend of mine pointed out: "Zero
    is also an integer multiple."

[quant]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantitative_analysis_(finance)

Insight also spent a lot of time teaching us about **equity**: owning a piece
of the company you're working in. For [publicly traded companies][public],
things were simple: I would get a certain number of [RSUs][rsu] that would
vest over the next three or four years, at which point I could sell them (or
hold them).[^rsu_sale]

[public]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_company
[rsu]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Restricted_stock

[^rsu_sale]:
    I generally sell my RSUs immediately; I already have my salary and health
    insurance tied up in my employment, so selling the RSUs lets me diversify.

Startups were more complicated. I didn't get any offers from startups, but
this is what I learned from Insight and from working with VCs for two years:
particularly valuable early hires can receive up to a few percent ownership of
the startup, but over time that share would ["dilute"][dilution] as new stock
was issued. Complicated vesting structures could mean that even with a good
exit, your shares might be worth less than you thought if you're far down the
[liquidation preference][lp] stack.

[dilution]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_dilution
[lp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquidation_preference

After all the preparation, I had two offers to consider. But how to choose?
Just pick the biggest number, right? Turns out it isn't so simple. There are a
lot of _intangibles_---like "what work would I be doing?" and "who would I
work with?"---that matter a lot, possibly more than money. I decided to go
with the offer that had a bunch of great people on the team and a very
interesting problem, even though the total compensation was lower.

## Negotiating

Once I had decided on an offer, I entered the most stressful part:
negotiating. Insight had drilled into me that regardless of the offer I
picked, I had to negotiate it. I spent a few days talking to my friends and
family about the offer, trying to work up the courage to call the hiring
manager. In the end, I took a deep breath and wrote a quick email:

> Hi!
> 
> I'm very excited by your offer and the thought of working with the team, but
> I have another offer for $15,000 more. Can you increase yours? If so, I'll
> sign today.
> 
> Alex

They wrote back a few hours later, having increased the offer by $7,500. I
signed immediately. That five-minute email earned me $18,000 more over two
years in increased salary and bonus. A pretty good return on investment for a
few minutes of stress.

That time, I had leverage: a higher competing offer. A second offer shows your
true market value---someone else is literally willing to pay you that much.

Two years later, I got an amazing offer from my current company, far higher
than what I'd said I was looking for during the interview. I knew I had made a
slight error giving the first number, and in the back of my mind I could hear
my Insight advisor telling me to negotiate. But I was nervous. I did not have
a counteroffer for leverage or to fall back on.

I talked to the VCs I worked with for a few days to work up the courage. They
all gave the same advice: negotiate. One even said that when he was hired, he
was sure his new boss would have seen it as a red flag if he _hadn't_ tried to
get a better deal---after all, making deals was his job. Data science is a
little different from investing, but the advice holds: as a hiring manager,
I've never once minded when a candidate negotiated. I'm just excited to close
on someone who's going to help my team reach our goals.

I wrote an email asking for a lot and got a reply back asking for a phone
call. I laid out my rationale---that my friends with similar experience were
getting those kinds of offers. They kept me sweating for a few days, but
finally returned an offer with a $5,000 higher base salary and $50,000 more in
RSUs. It was a lot more stressful than my first negotiating experience because
I did not have a fallback option, but again the return on investment was huge!

## Helping Others Negotiate

Even if you are not motivated by money, as I was not, if there is some cause
you care about---your family, the environment, helping others---you should
negotiate. Why? Because money will give you the means to advance your aims.
You can donate it, hire someone with it, or put it away for later. In the end,
either you or your employer will have the extra dollars; who do you think will
put it to better use?

One of my friends got a great offer for a software developer position in the
Midwest and was reluctant to negotiate. He asked me, "I have no kids, we own
our house. My wife and I don't need anything. Should I still negotiate?" I
encouraged him to do so anyway. With just a few emails, he got a larger
signing bonus,[^bonus] which, true to his ideals, he donated to charity.

[^bonus]: A one-time bonus paid when you start a new job.

The only leverage he had was that they wanted to hire him and he had not
signed their offer letter yet, but that is often enough. Hiring managers spend
a lot of time screening candidates; when they find one they think is a good
fit, they are anxious to close the deal before someone else does! Offering to
sign immediately if your conditions are met is a great way to open a
negotiation. You signal to the other party that if they do this one thing for
you, they will get what they want: your signature. It's a win-win.

Another one of my friends got an offer for her first data science job at an
autonomous driving company. She had a few other offers pending, but this was
her dream job. I had helped her through each part of her job search, and so
she called me to talk over the offer. I told her it was a great offer, but
since she still had offers pending, she should ask them for $10,000 more base
salary to sign immediately.

She initially balked; it was her preferred company, after all, and she didn't
want to lose the offer. I told her they had already spent a lot of money
interviewing her and determined that she was the right candidate. Asking for
more was not going to jeopardize the offer; they would actually appreciate the
opportunity to close on a candidate without having to compete. After a few
minutes, she promised to send them an email. A few days later, she called:
they'd said yes immediately.

Agreeing to sign immediately and having other offers are two good ways to
start your negotiating that I have used and coached my friends in using, but
there are many more. I highly recommend reading [Patrick McKenzie's guide to
negotiating][patio11], where he covers everything from what the employer's
bargaining position is to a step-by-step guide through the whole negotiating
process, and even what to say to avoid the dreaded "So what's your current
salary?" question. Patrick's guide has helped engineers and data scientists
earn combined millions of dollars in additional compensation; you should join
their ranks!

[patio11]: https://www.kalzumeus.com/2012/01/23/salary-negotiation/

Finally, remember that money isn't everything. You can negotiate all the
various parts of your compensation, including things you might not consider
part of your compensation: vacation days, work location, and the ability to
work from home. These can be easier to negotiate because, as an employee, we
often value them much higher than the exact monetary value assigned by
employers.

Negotiating an offer is stressful but lucrative. Data scientists get many
forms of compensation and are in high demand. That gives us leverage. Use it.
It's easier than you think, and you truly have nothing to lose.
