---
layout: post
title: "Insight Data Science: Should I Go?"
description: >
  Insight promises an easy transition to a career in data science or machine
  learning, but is it the right program for you? I have a few words of advice
  offered from experience.
image: /files/
---

Following [Neha's][neha] [advice][advice] about writing a blog post for any
email you've written over and over, I thought I'd answer a question I get
often: "Should I attend [Insight Data Science][insight]?"

[neha]: https://twitter.com/nerdneha
[advice]: https://twitter.com/math_rachel/status/822958139343446016
[insight]: https://www.insightdatascience.com/

I'm qualified to answer this question because I was an Insight fellow in June
of 2015 in the data science track (DS-SV-2015B). That, of course, is also my
bias: I found my current job through Insight, made a bunch of friends, and am
happy with the experience in general. That said, it isn't for everyone.

## What is Insight?

At it's simplest, Insight is a program to help people find jobs in data
science related fields. They have [data science][insight], [health data
science][health], [data engineering][de], and [machine learning][ai] tracks
scatted across four areas: Boston, New York, Seattle, and the Bay Area. The
data science tracks accept solely PhDs, while the others accept PhDs and other
technically minded folks. Each program runs for about three months and at the
end you (ideally) have a job.

[health]: https://www.insighthealthdata.com/
[de]: https://www.insightdataengineering.com/
[ai]: https://www.insightdata.ai/

## What Would I Do There?

Insight isn't like graduate school or college. There are only a few lectures
on data science and related topics (start ups and equity, tech interviews,
offer negotiation, SQL, etc.); most of the learning is project based. When you
start Insight, you pick a data project and spend the first few weeks
(feverishly) working on it! Each program is structured roughly like this:

- 4 weeks of building a data project
- 3 weeks of demoing the project at various companies
- 3+ weeks of interviewing with companies you demoed at

Through out the program you receive guidance from the Insight staff (many of
whom were hired out of the program), previous fellows, and the other fellows
that make up your session. This last group shouldn't be understated: you will
learn a lot from the other fellows going through the program as you ask each
other for help with your projects. Everyone is an expert at something, and a
novice at something else.

While you build your project, companies will come present what they do and why
they need data scientist. After your project is completed you will put
together a list of the companies that you are interested in talking to and
will get to demo at **some, but not all**, of them because the number of
people who can demo at a specific company is limited. Over the next few weeks
you will give a short demonstration and presentation of your project at about
eight companies, and some of them will want to take the next step and
interview you. When not demoing, you will practice interviewing and brush up
on all the topics you are unsure of.

## Why Should I Go?

### Lots of Exposure

Insight is a great way to get a quick survey of about thirty companies in the
area that are all hiring data scientists. From my position in Minnesota I knew
of the big name companies (Apple, Google, Facebook, etc.) but not really any
of the medium or small companies. One of these small companies (the one I
currently work for) was the perfect fit for me, and I would have never found
them without Insight to make the introduction.

### A Killer Network

Insight is also a great way to build a professional network. They have around
a thousand alumni now scattered all across the country. Friends from my
session now work at numerous startups as well as major companies like:

- AdRoll
- AirBNB
- Facebook
- Google
- Kabaam!
- LinkedIn
- Netflix
- Salesforce
- SambaTV
- Silicon Valley Data Science
- Stitch Fix
- VEVO

This network would have been hard to replicate on my own!

### Great Friends and Community

Finally, I've made friends from among the people who went to Insight with me.
This might seem like a minor point, but if you're picking up your life and
moving across the country it is great to have a group you can hang out with. I
regularly go on bike rides, play board games, or just get dinner with the
people from my session.

## Sounds Great! What's the Catch?

Here are some things to consider before you accept your invitation to join
Insight:

### Insight is _Free_, but **EXPENSIVE**

Insight doesn't charge the fellows anything. In fact, they even provide
need-based scholarships to some. Still, living without a job for three or four
months is hard. In the Bay Area that will probably cost you about $2000 a
month in rent (although you can find cheaper if you have roommates). Insight
isn't your employer, so you won't have health insurance unless you still have
it from your school (mine lasted over the summer after I graduated,
thankfully) or buy it yourself. I had a good amount of savings from grad
school which were just about wiped out by the three months renting in Palo
Alto, and I have friends who charged up their credit cards heavily to get by.
We are all doing fine now, but it was stressful before we had job offers.

### Not Everyone Finds a Job in Three Months

Insight claims that the vast majority of fellows find a job in the industry,
and this is true, but they don't promise that it will happen within the three
months. Everyone in my session who stuck with it got a job that they loved in
data science, but for a few of them it took a long time. About a third of my
class had offers within a week or two, another third took about a month or
slightly longer, and the last third dragged out over a few months with one or
two of my friends taking four or more months. I've known fellows in other
sessions who have taken six months of interviewing to get an offer.

### You Need to Know How To Code

Data scientists need to know how to work with data, but they also need to know
how to code. A good grasp of at least one language is a must, and it would be
very tough to pick up coding from scratch at Insight. If you can't write
[FizzBuzz][fizz] then you will have catching up to do. This is especially true
for machine learning positions, which have interviews that more closely follow
the "standard" developer interview pattern of writing code on the white board
over and over and over again.

[fizz]: https://imranontech.com/2007/01/24/using-fizzbuzz-to-find-developers-who-grok-coding/

## Final Thoughts

So should you go? I think, for me, it was worth it because the benefits you I
got from Insight live on well after the program.
