---
layout: post
title: "Insight Data Science: Should I Go?"
description: >
  Insight promises an easy transition to a career in data science or machine
  learning, but is it the right program for you? I have a few words of advice
  offered from experience.
image: /files/insight/stanford_dish_by_jawed_cc_by_3.jpg
image: /files/insight/stanford_dish_in_the_early_morning_hours_by_brianhama_cc_by_sa_4.jpg
image_alt: >
  The Stanford Dish, a large radio telescope, in the early morning light. The
  sky is purple and blue, and the dish is a white metal-lattice structure
  glowing softly pink in the light. At the top of the dish is a red light.
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files/insight/{% endcapture %}

{% include lead_image.html %}

Following [Neha's][neha] [advice][advice] about writing a blog post for any
email that you've written over and over, I thought I'd answer a question I get
often: "I'm trying to get a job in data science; should I attend
[Insight][insight]?"

[neha]: https://twitter.com/nerdneha
[advice]: https://twitter.com/math_rachel/status/822958139343446016
[insight]: https://www.insightdatascience.com/

I'm qualified to answer this question because I was an Insight fellow in June
of 2015 in the data science track (DS-SV-2015B). That, of course, is also my
bias: I found my current and previous job through Insight, made a bunch of friends, and am
happy with the experience in general. I am also a technical adviser, meaning I
mentor the fellows weekly in exchange for a small bit of equity in the
company.[^1]

## What is Insight?

Insight is a program to help people find jobs in data science related fields.
Their initial program was the [data science][insight] track---which I will
discuss in the remained of this post---but they have also expanded to cover
various other data-related fields as well. The data science program is offered
multiple cities: Boston, New York, Seattle, Toronto, and the Bay Area. There
is also a remote session that is entirely online. They accept solely PhDs,
mostly from technical fields but with a few other technically minded folk with
liberal arts PhDs. Each program runs for about three months and at the end you
will (ideally) have a job.

## What Would I Do There?

Insight isn't like graduate school. While there are a few talks covering a variety
of useful topics---SQL, startups and equity, tech interviews, etc.---the
majority of the learning is project based. You pick a project and then spend a
few weeks (feverishly) working on it, learning by doing and by talking to the
people around you. I wrote about my project, [WhereTo.Photo][my_project], if
you are interested in what one of these projects looks like.

[my_project]: {% post_url 2016-09-22-whereto_photo %}

The program is structured like this:

- 4 weeks of building a data project
- 3 weeks of demoing the project at various companies
- 3+ weeks of interviewing with companies you demoed at

Throughout the program you receive guidance from the Insight staff (many of
whom were hired out of the program), industry mentors, previous fellows, and
the other fellows that make up your session. This last group **shouldn't be
underestimated**: you learn a lot from the other fellows as you ask each other
for help with your projects. Everyone is an expert at something, and a novice
at something else.

During the first few weeks, companies come by to present what they do and why
they need data scientists. After all the companies have presented you put
together a list of the companies that you are interested in. You will get to
demo at **some**, **but not all**, of them, because the number of people who
can demo at any particular company is limited.

Over the next few weeks you show off your project at some of the companies
that you selected (eight per fellow during my session). Some of those
companies will want to take the next step and interview you. When not demoing,
you practice interviewing and brush up on all the topics you are unsure of.

## Why Should I Go?

![A landscape of the Stanford hills including the Stanford Dish shrouded in
light fog. The sun is setting behind the dish making the sky appear bright
white.][dish_2]

[dish_2]: {{ file_dir}}/stanford_dish_by_jawed_cc_by_3.jpg

### Lots of Exposure

Insight is a great way to get a quick survey of about thirty companies in the
area that are all hiring data scientists. From Minnesota I knew of the big
name companies in Silicon Valley (Apple, Google, Facebook, etc.) but not
really any of the medium or small companies. One of those small companies was
the perfect fit for me and I spent two great years working there; I never
would have found them without Insight to make the introduction.

### A Killer Network

Insight is also a great way to build a professional network. There over a
thousand alumni scattered all across the country. Friends from my session now
work at a wide variety of companies, including:
AdRoll, 
Airbnb, 
Facebook, 
Google, 
Instagram, 
Intuit, 
Kabaam!, 
LinkedIn, 
Netflix, 
Salesforce, 
SambaTV, 
Silicon Valley Data Science, 
Stitch Fix, 
and
VEVO.

This network is incredibly valuable---it is how I found my second job---and it
would have been hard to build without Insight.

### Great Friends and Community

Finally, I've made great friends from among the people who went through
Insight with me. This might seem like a minor point, but if you're picking up
your life and moving across the country it is great to have a group you can
hang out with. I regularly go on bike rides, play board games, or just get
dinner with the people from my session.

## Sounds Great! What's the Catch?

### Insight is _Free_, but **EXPENSIVE**

Insight doesn't charge the fellows anything, and they even offer a limited
number of need-based scholarships to help cover expenses. Still, living
without a job for three or four months is hard. Rent in the Bay Area will set
you back around $2000 a month. My wife and I had a good amount of savings, but
it was just about wiped out renting for three months without a second source
of income. We did not have to fall back on our credit cards, but I know
fellows who needed to.

Insight is also not your employer, so you will have to get health insurance
somewhere else. My graduate school insurance lasted over the summer, but this
is not the case for everyone.

### Not Everyone Finds a Job in Three Months

[Insight says that the vast majority of fellows find a job in the
industry][faq], and this is true, but they don't promise that it will happen
within the three months. Everyone in my session who stuck with it got a job
that they loved in data science, but for a few of them it took a long time.
About a third of my class had offers within a week or two, another third took
about a month or slightly longer, and the last third dragged out over a few
months with one or two of my friends taking more than four months. I've known
fellows in other sessions who have taken six months of interviewing to get an
offer.

[faq]: https://www.insightdatascience.com/faq

### You Need to Know How To Code

Data scientists need to know how to work with data, but they also need to know
how to code. [A good grasp of at least one language is a must][prepare], and
it would be very tough to pick up coding from scratch at Insight. If you can't
write [FizzBuzz][fizz] then you will have catching up to do. This is
especially true for machine learning positions, which have interviews that
more closely follow the "standard" developer interview pattern of writing code
on the whiteboard over and over and over again.

[prepare]: https://blog.insightdatascience.com/preparing-for-the-transition-to-data-science-e9194c90b42c
[fizz]: https://imranontech.com/2007/01/24/using-fizzbuzz-to-find-developers-who-grok-coding/

## Final Thoughts

I believe giving someone all the information they need to make an informed
decision. That's why I wrote this post. I think Insight is worth the costs,
but I wanted to make those costs known ahead of time. In the end, I would go
through the program again. It helped my career get off to a great start by
finding the perfect first company for me. Could I have gotten a data science
job without Insight? Probably, but the experience certainly would have been
more painful, and I don't think I would be as happy with the outcome because
the network I built has really helped expand my possibilities.

---

[^1]: About 221 shares with an estimated value of $158. For the record, they also buy me dinner when I come in to mentor after work.
