---
layout: post
title: "Data Science, Compensation, and Asking for Money"
description: >
image: /files/
image_alt: >
categories: plotting
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files//{% endcapture %}

I didn't become a physicist for money, quite the opposite in fact. I remember
walking across UC Berkeley's Sproul Plaza with my father on our way to our
favorite lunch place when I told him "I love that [Cosmology][Cosmology] has
so few practical applications! It's amazing that someone will pay me just to
expand human knowledge!" Perhaps that should have been my first hint that
Physics did not have great long-term prospects, but I don't think that would
have changed my decision to pursue it.

[cosmology]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmology

The first time I visited [CERN][cern] during [my PhD][phd], I got an ascetic
feeling from looking at the dilapidated buildings and missing storm shutters.
Its exterior reflected the same feeling I had expressed to my father a few
years earlier—that pursuing science was worth more than dollars. I felt
instantly at home.

[cern]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERN
[phd]: {% post_url 2018-05-20-my_phd_thesis %}

When I ended up [leaving academia][leaving] academia several years later, it
was for stability, not money. I had no intention of dragging my family around
the globe just to end up six years older and once again hunting for a job; I
had seen my CERN colleagues try and universally fail to land tenure track
positions. So I decided to head back to where I grew up---the Bay Area---and
see if I could make it as a data scientist with the help of the Insight
program.

[leaving]: {% post_url 2018-01-19-should_i_get_a_phd %}

## Compensation

As someone who had never been motivated by money, I discovered during my job
search that I was a little naive as to what all the numbers meant.
Fortunately, Insight anticipated this and brought experienced data scientists,
startup founders, and tech company executives to give us a crash course on
life outside of academia. I learned everything there was to know about salary,
bonuses, and equity.

I was already familiar with **base salary**: what you're paid in semi-weekly
paychecks in exchange for doing your job. It's what I thought of when I heard
"This job pays $120,000 a year." But salary isn't everything for data
scientists since we receive multiple other forms of compensation as well.

Every offer I received paid a **yearly bonus** of 15-20% based on performance.
Those were for data science and machine learning positions at standard tech
companies, but I heard from some data scientists in finance and investment
that they would be upset if their bonuses were not "integer multiples of their
salary."[^1]

Finally, Insight spent a lot of time teaching us about **equity**: owning a
piece of the company you're working in. For [publicly traded
companies][public], my offers were simple: I would get a certain number of
[RSUs][rsu] that would vest over the next three or four years at which point I
could sell them on the stock market (or hold them).[^2]

[public]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_company
[rsu]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Restricted_stock

Startups were more complicated. I didn't get any offers from startups, but
this is what I learned from Insight and from working with VCs for two years:
particularly valuable early hires can receive up to a few percent ownership of
the startup, but over time that share would ["dilute"][dilution] as new stock
was issued. Complicated vesting structures could mean even with a good exit,
your shares might be worth less than you thought if you're far down the
[liquidation preference][lp] stack.

[dilution]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_dilution
[lp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquidation_preference

After all the preparation and contemplation about compensation, I had two
offers to consider. But how to choose? Just pick the biggest number, right?
Turns out it isn't so simple. There are a lot of _intangibles_--like "what
work would I be doing" and "who would I work with"--that matter a lot,
possibly more than money. I decided to go with the offer that had a bunch of
great people on the team and a very interesting problem, even though the total
compensation was lower.

## Negotiating

Once I had decided on an offer, I entered the most stressful part:
negotiating. Insight had drill into me that regardless of the offer I decided
to accept, I had to negotiate it. I spent a few days talking to my friends and
family about the offer trying to work up the courage to call the hiring
manager. In the end I took a deep breath and wrote a quick email:

> Hi!
> 
> I'm very excited by your offer and the thought of working with the team, but
> I have another offer for $15,000 more. Can you increase yours? If so, I'll
> sign today.
> 
> Alex

They wrote back a few hours later having increased the offer by $7,500, and I
signed immediately. A five minute email earned me $18,000 over two years in
increased salary and bonus. A pretty good return on investment for a few
minutes of stress.

That time I had leverage: an offer from another company that was higher than
the offer I wanted to accept. Having another offer is a great way to
demonstrate what your true market value is; after all, the offer demonstrates
clearly what someone is willing to pay you.

Two years later, I got an amazing offer from my current company, far higher
than what I'd said I was looking for during the interview. I knew I had made a
slight error giving the first number, and in the back of my mind I could hear
my Insight advisor telling me to negotiate. But I was nervous; I did not have
a counter offer for leverage or to fall back on.

I talked to the VCs I worked with for a few days to work up the courage. They
all thought negotiating was the correct thing to do (they were right), even
saying "look, in my job if I didn't negotiate my offer they'd consider it a
bad sign." Data science is a little different than investing, but the advice
is solid: as a hiring manager, I've never once cared that someone negotiated.
I'm just excited to close on a candidate that is going to help my team
complete our goals.

I wrote an email asking for a lot and got a reply back asking for a phone
call. I laid out my rationale—that my friends with similar experience were
getting those kinds of offers. They kept me sweating for a few days, but
finally returned an offer with $5,000 higher base salary and $50,000 more in
RSUs. It was a lot more stressful than my first negotiating experience because
I did not have a fallback option, but again the return on investment was huge!

## Helping Others Negotiate

Even if you are not motivated by money, as I was not, if there is some cause
you care about---your family, the environment, helpings others---you should
negotiate. Why? Because money will give you the means to advance your aims.
You can donate it, hire someone with it, or put it away for later. In the end,
either you or your employer will have the extra dollars; who do you think will
spend it better?

One of my friends got a great offer for a software developer position in the
midwest and was reluctant to negotiate. He asked me, "I have no kids, I have a
house, my wife and I don't need anything thing. Do I still negotiate?" I
encouraged him to do so anyway. With just a few emails he got a larger signing
bonus[^3] which, true to his ideals, he donated to charity.

The only leverage he had was that they wanted to hire him and he had not
signed their offer letter yet, but that is often enough. Hiring managers spend
a lot of time screening candidates; when they find one they think is a good
fit they are anxious to close the deal before someone else makes them an
offer. Offering to sign immediately if your conditions are met is a great way
to open a negotiating. You signal to the other party that if they do this one
thing for you they will get what they want: your signature. It's a win-win.

Another one of my friends got an offer for her first data science job at an
autonomous driving company. She had a few other offers pending, but this was
her dream job. I had helped through each part of her job search and so she
called me to talk over the offer. I told her it was a great offer, but since
she still had offers pending she should ask them for $10,000 more base salary
to sign immediately.

She initially balked; it was her preferred company after all and she didn't
want to lose the offer. I told her they had already spent a lot of money
interviewing her, and determined that she was the right candidate. Asking for
more was not going to jeopardize the offer, but they would actually appreciate
the opportunity to close on a candidate without having to compete. After a few
minutes she promised to send them an email. A few days later she called me
back to say they had immediately said yes to her counter offer.

Agreeing to sign immediately and having other offers are two good ways to
start your negotiating that I have used and coached my friends in using, but
there are many more. I highly recommend reading [Patrick McKenzie's guide to
negotiating][patio11], where he covers everything from what the employer's
bargaining position is to a step-by-step guide through the whole negotiating
process, and even what to say to avoid the dreaded "So what's your current
salary?" question. Patrick's guide has helped engineers and data scientists
earn combined millions of dollars in additional compensation; you should join
their ranks!

[patio11]: https://www.kalzumeus.com/2012/01/23/salary-negotiation/

Finally, remember that money isn't everything. You can negotiate all the
different parts of your compensation, including things you might not consider
part of your compensation: vacation days, work location, and the ability to
work from home. These can be easier to negotiate because as an employee we
often value them much higher than the exact monetary value assigned by
employers.

Negotiating an offer is stressful but lucrative. Data scientists have a lot of
different types of compensation and our profession is in high demand, which
makes negotiating easier because we have a lot of flexibility in what to ask
for and the hiring manager has an incentive to get us to sign. It's easier
than you think, and you have nothing to lose.

---

[^1]: Although as a [quant][quant] friend of mine pointed out: "Zero is also an integer multiple."
[^2]: I generally sell my RSUs immediately; I already have my salary and health insurance tied up in my employment, so selling the RSUs lets me diversify my holdings.
[^3]: A one-time bonus paid when you start a new job.

[quant]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantitative_analysis_(finance)
