---
layout: post
title: "A Review of Nookdesk's Standing Desk"
description: >
  I bought a Nookdesk standing desk now that I'm working from home; read on to
  find out how I like it!
image: /files/worst-code/montreal_light_head_and_power_consolidated_linesmen_1928.jpg
image_alt: >
  A black and white photo of three linesmen repairing a tangle of overhead wires.
categories: review
---

{% capture file_dir %}{% endcapture %}

{% include lead_image.html %}

I bought a standing desk recently since I am working from home three days a
week. I considered many desks but I finally bought a [Nookdesk][nookdesk]. It
was not an easy decision because I could only find [one **real** review
online][review]; all the others were rewritten press releases.

Luckily I had a good friend who had just bought one. She was happy with the
Nookdesk and I bought mine on the strength of her recommendation. In short, I
am also happy with it. For a complete review, read on.

[nookdesk]: https://www.nookdesk.com/
[review]: https://macsources.com/nookdesk-review-ordering-and-building-of-the-smart-desk-that-enhances-your-life/

## Desktop and Frame

The [Nookdesk][nookdesk] has a lot of customization options. The desktops are
offered in multiple materials from laminate up to solid bamboo. The desk
surface is always 30″ deep with widths from 48″ to 72″. The desk frame comes
in three colors: white, black, and grey.

I chose a 30″ by 72″ (+$200) blackwood laminate (+$100) desktop with white
frame. The desktop is 3/4″ thick. The wood laminate feels great; smooth with
just a bit of depth from the grain. The white frame contrasts nicely with the
black desktop.

The desk height ranges from 23.5″ to 49″ as measured from the ground to the
top of the desktop. This is just enough range for me as use it at 26.5″ when
seated and 47.5″ when standing.

## Storage

The Nookdesk has some unique storage options. One is the "upper storage"
add-on which I would describe as "a shelf". It is mounted on the top of the
desk at the back edge. It is 12″ deep and raised 4″ off desktop. I store my
controller and headphones under the shelf and I put my monitors on top to
bring them up to eye-level. The upper storage add-on cost $100, but was well
worth it.

There is a similar "lower storage" shelf that mounts under the desk at the
front edge. I did not order one because I like to have my desk surface very
close to my knees in the sitting position, and the lower storage would add 4″
to the bottom of the desk. It also costs $100.

The ability to add some storage to my desk and raise my monitors was the
feature that originally drew me to the Nookdesk and was what finally sold me
on them.

## Accessories

Nookdesk offers a wide variety of accessories, from keyboard trays to
speakers. Below I list only the ones I purchased.

### Controller

The Nookdesk comes with one of two controllers: a simple one which just has up
and down buttons and a programmable one with three memory settings for an
additional $34. I got the programmable controller because getting my desk to
exactly the right height each time was important for me. In the end I only
really needed two memory positions: one for standing and one for sitting. I
still have not assigned the third position.

### Powerstrip

Nookdesk sells a Freeport power strip that attaches to the
underside of the desk for $80. It has 8 outlets (including 2 with space around
them for those extra-large plugs) and 4 USB-A outlets, 3 of which provide up
2.4A and one which supports [Quick Charge 3.0][qc]. It has a 10 foot cord. You
can plug the desk's motor 1 of the 8 outlets so that you only have to plug in
the Freeport to the wall. I bought the Freeport and I am ratified with it, but
I suspect it could have found a cheaper power strip to mount.

[qc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quick_Charge

### CPU Mount

Nookdesk also sells an under-desk CPU mount. It will fit towers up to 9.25″
wide and 30″ tall, although if the desk is in its lowest position there is
only 20″ of clearance for the tower. The holder costs $100.

I love the CPU mount; it is one of my favorite features of the desk. It keeps
my computer off the ground and frees up space on my desktop. I highly
recommend it.

### Cable Tray

I bought the cable management tray. It is a metal tray that runs along the
bottom of the desk at the rear edge and allows you to tuck your cables into it
to keep them tidy. It costs $100. It does a good job of keeping cables tucked
awawy, but seems expensive for what it does.

## Shipping

If you do not create an account to checkout---as I did not---then you have to
use a special page on the Nookdesk site to check your order status. You should
be able to enter your email address and find your order, but it did not work
for me. Instead, I had to contact support. Thankfully they were able to send
me a tracking number.

Delivery was free (due to a coupon code) but seems to run about $120 without
it. I received 6 boxes from FedEx, split into two shipments, one week after
placing my order. The box containing the desktop was very large and relatively
heavy; I was able to lug it up my stairs by myself but it would have been much
easier to have a second person. The desk frame box was also really heavy
because it contains the two motors that move the desk up and down.

## Assembly

Assembling the desk was actually more difficult than I expected. There were a
few problems:

- The hardware---screws, bolts, guides, and whatnot---was packed in unlabeled
bags and the instructions reused the same icons to indicate different screws.
- The bill of materials listed items that came in the bags and those
preinstalled in the same count. When it said "10 screws of type X" it might
mean there are 4 in the bag and 6 already attached to the frame.
- Hardware was included that is only used for optional accessories. At the end
I had screws leftover that I had not used at all and I wondered if I had made
some horrible assembly mistake.
- Two hex keys are included, but one of them had such poor tolerance that it
would not drive the bolts. I had to use a set of hex keys I had instead.

Assembly took between 3 and 4 hours, but was not particularly difficult. I
made a minor mistake where I did not install the frame rails at the right time
and had to backtrack and remove some pieces to get them in. [Jon
Walters][review] says he made the same mistake in his review.

You do need enough space to flip the desk over as the build is started with the
desk upside down. The desk is unweildy, so it helps to have a second person
for this step, but I was able to do the entire build solo.

## Final Thoughts

Although the assembly and shipping experience could be improved, the desk is
solid and includes great accessories at a fair price. I have really
appreciated being able to swtich positions instead of sitting for 8 hours, and
so I am very happy with my Nookdesk.
